# Docker


## Introduction to Docker
Docker serves as a comprehensive platform that facilitates the seamless development, distribution, and execution of applications through the use of containers. Containers provide a standardized unit wherein developers can encapsulate an application along with its dependencies, ensuring consistent performance across diverse environments, from development and testing to deployment.


## Advantages of Docker 

1. **Portability:** Docker containers encapsulate an application and its dependencies, ensuring consistency across different environments. This makes it easy to move applications between development, testing, and production environments without compatibility issues.

2. **Isolation:** Docker containers isolate applications from the underlying system and from each other. This isolation ensures that applications run consistently, regardless of differences in the host environment.

3. **Resource Efficiency:** Containers share the host OS kernel, which makes them lightweight compared to virtual machines. Docker containers can start and stop quickly, leading to efficient utilization of system resources.

4. **Version Control:** Docker images can be versioned, allowing developers to track changes to the application and its dependencies over time. This makes it easier to roll back to a previous version if needed.

5. **Scalability:** Docker makes it easy to scale applications horizontally by running multiple containers across different hosts. Containers can be quickly deployed or scaled down based on demand.

6. **Flexibility:** Docker supports a wide range of application stacks and programming languages. It allows developers to package an application and its dependencies into a single container, regardless of the underlying technology.

7. **DevOps Integration:** Docker integrates well with DevOps tools and practices. Continuous integration and continuous deployment (CI/CD) pipelines can be easily set up with Docker, streamlining the development lifecycle.

8. **Security:** Docker provides a level of security through container isolation. Each container runs in its own user space, limiting the potential impact of security vulnerabilities. Additionally, Docker has features like namespace isolation and control groups to enhance security.

9. **Rapid Deployment:** Docker containers can be started and stopped quickly, facilitating rapid deployment of applications. This is particularly beneficial in dynamic and rapidly changing environments.

10. **Microservices Architecture:** Docker is well-suited for microservices architectures. Applications can be decomposed into smaller, independently deployable containers, making it easier to develop, test, and maintain complex systems.

11. **Ecosystem and Community:** Docker has a large and active community, which means there is a wealth of documentation, tutorials, and third-party tools available. This makes it easier for developers to find solutions to problems and stay updated on best practices.

12. **Cost Savings:** Docker's resource efficiency and scalability can lead to cost savings in terms of hardware, as more containers can be run on the same infrastructure compared to traditional virtualization. 


## Key Differences Between Docker Containers and Conventional Machine

1. **Isolation and Portability**
- **Docker:** Applications and their dependencies are packaged together in containers, providing isolation from the underlying system. This ensures that the application runs consistently across different environments, making it highly portable.
- **Conventional Machine:** Applications often rely on the system's configuration and dependencies, making them less portable. Changes in the underlying system can impact the application's behavior.

2. **Resource Efficiency**
- **Docker:** Containers share the host system's kernel and use resources more efficiently than virtual machines. They have lower overhead and can start up quickly.
- **Conventional Machine:** Running applications directly on the host system may lead to resource contention and less efficient utilization, especially in cases where applications have conflicting dependencies.

3. **Dependency Management**
- **Docker:** Containers encapsulate dependencies, libraries, and the application itself. This helps in avoiding conflicts with other applications or system-level dependencies.
- **Conventional Machine:** Applications may rely on specific versions of libraries and dependencies. Managing these dependencies can be challenging and may lead to conflicts or compatibility issues.

4. **Isolation of Processes:**
- **Docker:** Containers isolate processes, making it possible to run multiple applications with different dependencies on the same host without interference.
- **Conventional Machine:** Applications running directly on the host system may interfere with each other, especially if they have conflicting dependencies or resource requirements.

5. **Consistency Across Environments**
- **Docker:** Docker containers ensure consistency in development, testing, and production environments, reducing the "it works on my machine" problem.
- **Conventional Machine:** Variations in system configurations can lead to inconsistencies between development and production environments.

6. **Ease of Deployment and Scaling**
- **Docker:** Docker facilitates easy deployment and scaling of applications. Containerized applications can be deployed consistently across different environments and scaled horizontally.
- **Conventional Machine:** Deploying and scaling applications on conventional systems may involve more manual configuration and may be less scalable.

7. **Versioning and Rollbacks**
- **Docker:** Docker images can be versioned, allowing for easy rollbacks and updates. This enhances the ability to manage application versions effectively.
- **Conventional Machine:** Versioning and rollback processes may be more complex and manual, involving backups or other mechanisms.

> **NOTE:** Docker provides a more lightweight, portable, and efficient way to package, distribute, and run applications compared to conventional systems where applications often rely on the host environment. Docker's containerization approach offers benefits in terms of consistency, scalability, and ease of management.


## Key Differences Between Docker Containers and Virtual Machines

1. **Architecture**
- **Docker:** Docker uses containerization, which involves encapsulating an application and its dependencies into a container. Containers share the host operating system's kernel but run in isolated user spaces.
- **Virtual Machines:** VMs, on the other hand, involve running a hypervisor on the host machine, which then creates multiple virtualized operating systems, each with its own kernel. Each VM runs a complete guest operating system.

2. **Resource Overhead**
- **Docker:** Containers are lightweight and share the host OS kernel, resulting in lower resource overhead. They start up quickly and use resources more efficiently than VMs.
- **Virtual Machines:** VMs have higher resource overhead because they include a full guest OS and emulate hardware. This can lead to longer startup times and increased resource usage.

3. **Isolation**
- **Docker:** Containers provide process-level isolation. Each container runs as an isolated process on the host system, but they share the same OS kernel.
- **Virtual Machines:** VMs provide stronger isolation because they emulate an entire operating system, including its kernel. This makes VMs more secure in some contexts.

4. **Portability**
- **Docker:** Containers are highly portable. Docker containers can run consistently across different environments as long as they have the Docker runtime installed.
- **Virtual Machines:** VMs are less portable because they encapsulate an entire operating system. Moving VMs between different hypervisors or cloud platforms can be more complex.

5. **Performance**
- **Docker:** Containers generally have better performance due to their lightweight nature and reduced overhead. They share the host OS kernel, allowing for more efficient resource utilization.
- **Virtual Machines:** VMs may have higher performance overhead due to the emulation of hardware and the need for a full guest OS.

6. **Scalability**
- **Docker:** Containers are designed for horizontal scaling. It's easy to deploy and scale multiple containers on a host machine or across multiple machines.
- **Virtual Machines:** VMs are traditionally scaled vertically by adding more resources to a single VM. Horizontal scaling with VMs can be more complex.

7. **Start-Up Time**
- **Docker:** Containers start up quickly since they don't need to boot an entire operating system.
- **Virtual Machines:** VMs typically have longer startup times because they need to boot a complete OS.

8. **Use Cases**
- **Docker:** Docker is well-suited for microservices architectures, continuous integration and delivery (CI/CD), and environments where lightweight, portable, and scalable solutions are required.
- **Virtual Machines:** VMs are often used in scenarios where strong isolation or compatibility with different operating systems is necessary, such as legacy applications or when running multiple operating systems on a single host.

> **NOTE:** Docker and virtual machines (VMs) are both technologies that enable the isolation of applications, but they differ in their approach and the level of abstraction they provide. Containers are lightweight, portable, and efficient, while virtual machines provide stronger isolation and are more versatile in running different operating systems. The choice between Docker and virtual machines depends on specific use case requirements and preferences. In many modern applications and development workflows, both technologies may be used together for optimal results.

## Docker's Role in DevOps and Software Development

Docker plays a crucial role in DevOps and Software Development by providing a containerization platform that allows developers to package and distribute applications, along with their dependencies, in a consistent and reproducible manner. Here are some key aspects of Docker's role in DevOps and Software Development:

1. **Isolation and Portability:**
   - Docker containers encapsulate an application and its dependencies, ensuring isolation from the underlying infrastructure. This isolation makes it easier to maintain consistency across different environments, such as development, testing, and production.
   - Containers are portable, meaning they can run consistently across various environments, reducing the "it works on my machine" problem. This portability simplifies the deployment process and improves collaboration between development and operations teams.

2. **Consistency and Reproducibility:**
   - Docker provides a consistent environment for developers, eliminating the "it works on my machine" issue. This consistency ensures that applications run the same way in different environments, reducing the likelihood of errors caused by differences in system configurations.

3. **Efficient Resource Utilization:**
   - Docker containers share the host operating system's kernel, which makes them lightweight compared to traditional virtual machines. This results in efficient resource utilization and faster startup times.
   - The lightweight nature of containers allows for higher density on a single host, enabling more efficient use of resources in both development and production environments.

4. **Microservices Architecture:**
   - Docker facilitates the adoption of microservices architecture by enabling the deployment of individual components as separate containers. Each microservice can be developed, tested, and deployed independently, promoting agility and scalability.

5. **Continuous Integration and Continuous Deployment (CI/CD):**
   - Docker containers integrate seamlessly with CI/CD pipelines. Developers can build, test, and deploy applications in a consistent environment throughout the development lifecycle.
   - CI/CD tools can use Docker images to create reproducible build environments, ensuring that the same set of dependencies is used in both development and production stages.

6. **Versioning and Rollback:**
   - Docker images are versioned, allowing developers to roll back to previous versions easily in case of issues. This versioning helps in maintaining a history of changes and provides a mechanism for reliable and predictable deployments.

7. **Scalability:**
   - Docker containers are designed to scale horizontally, making it easier to handle increased workloads by adding more containers. This scalability is crucial for applications with varying resource demands.

8. **Infrastructure as Code (IaC):**
   - Docker configurations can be managed as code, allowing for the automation of infrastructure setup and deployments. This aligns with the principles of Infrastructure as Code (IaC) and helps in maintaining consistency and repeatability.

## Key Components of Docker

### 1. Docker Engine

The **Docker Engine** is the fundamental and central component of Docker. It provides a platform for building, running, and managing Docker containers. It consists of three main parts:

- **Docker Daemon:** The Docker daemon is a background process responsible for managing Docker objects such as images, containers, networks, and volumes. It listens for Docker API requests and manages their execution.

- **REST API:** Docker provides a REST API that allows users to interact with the Docker daemon using HTTP requests. This API enables developers to control Docker containers and services programmatically.

- **Command-Line Interface (CLI):** The Docker CLI provides a command-line interface for users to interact with Docker. It allows developers to build, manage, and deploy Docker containers using simple commands.

### 2. Docker Images

**Docker Images** are the building blocks of containers. An image is a lightweight, standalone, and executable package that includes everything needed to run a piece of software. This encompasses the application code, runtime, libraries, and system tools. Key concepts related to Docker images include:

- **Layers:** Docker images are composed of multiple layers. Each layer represents a set of file changes or instructions in the image's Dockerfile. This layered approach enables efficient sharing of common layers among multiple images.

- **Dockerfile:** A Dockerfile is a script that contains instructions for building a Docker image. It specifies the base image, environment variables, commands to run, and other configurations needed to create the image.

### 3. Docker Containers

**Docker Containers** are instances of Docker images. When an image is executed, it becomes a running container. Containers are lightweight, isolated environments that share the host operating system's kernel but have their own file system, processes, and networking. Key aspects of Docker containers include:

- **Isolation:** Containers provide process and file system isolation, allowing applications to run consistently across different environments without interference.

- **Stateless Nature:** Containers are designed to be stateless, meaning they do not retain data or state between runs. Persistent data is typically managed using volumes.

- **Networking:** Docker containers can be connected to networks, allowing communication between containers or with external services. Docker supports various network drivers for different use cases.

### 4. Docker Registry

The **Docker Registry** is a centralized repository for storing and sharing Docker images. It plays a crucial role in the distribution and collaboration of containerized applications. Key points about Docker Registry include:

- **Docker Hub:** Docker Hub is the default public registry provided by Docker. It hosts a vast collection of public images that developers can use as a base for their applications.

- **Private Registries:** Organizations often set up private Docker registries to store proprietary or sensitive images. This ensures greater control over image distribution, security, and compliance.

- **Push and Pull:** Docker images can be pushed (uploaded) to a registry and pulled (downloaded) from a registry. This facilitates collaboration among development teams and the sharing of images between different environments.

Understanding these key components provides a solid foundation for leveraging Docker in various aspects of software development and deployment.


## Difference Between Docker Images and Docker Containers

### Docker Image

- An image is a lightweight, standalone, and executable package that includes everything needed to run a piece of software, such as code, runtime, libraries, environment variables, and config files.
- Images are often created from a set of instructions in a Dockerfile, specifying the base image, software dependencies, and setup steps.
- Images are immutable, meaning they do not change once created. Any modifications result in the creation of a new image version.
- Images are stored in a registry (e.g., Docker Hub) and can be pulled to run on any system supporting Docker.

### Docker Container

- A container is a running instance of a Docker image, providing an isolated execution environment for the application and its dependencies.
- Containers share the host OS kernel but have their own filesystem, processes, and network, ensuring isolation from the host and other containers.
- Containers are dynamic and can be started, stopped, moved, and deleted. They encapsulate an application and its runtime environment.
- Containers are ephemeral, with changes made during runtime discarded when the container is stopped, unless explicitly committed to a new image.

> **NOTE:** An image is a static, immutable blueprint for software, while a container is a dynamic, runnable instance of that image. Images serve as packaging for software distribution, while containers provide an isolated and consistent runtime environment for applications.


## Basic Dockers Commands

**List All Images Present Locally**
```
docker images
```

**Pull Images From DockerHub**
```
docker pull image_name:version
```

**Create Containr From Existing Image**

```
docker run image_name
```
- NOTE: It will create a container or pull the image of latest version if not present locally and then create container. 
 
```
docker run  image_name:version
```
- NOTE: It will create a container of specified version or pull the image of specified version if not present locally and then create container. 

```
docker run -d image_name
```
- NOTE: `-d` flag stands for "detached" mode. It will create and run the container in the background, allowing us to continue using the terminal for other commands.

```
docker run -it image_name
```
- NOTE: `-it` flag stads for "interactive terminal". It will create and run the container and will open the interactive terminal of that container.

```
docker run --name CustomContainerName image_name
```
- NOTE: '--name' flag  allow to specify a custom name for the container.

```
docker run -itd --name CustomContainerName image_name
```

**List All Runing Containers**
```
docker ps
```
- NOTE: It will list only running containers.
```
docker ps -a
```
- NOTE: It will list all running and stoped containers.

**Stop Running Container**
```
docker stop <container_name/id>
```

**Restart Stoped Container**
```
docker start <container_name/id>
```

**Opening Interactive Terminal of a Running Container**
```
docker exec -it <container_name/id> /bib/bash
```


##  Host Port and Container Port

**Host Port:**
- The host port is the port on the host machine that is mapped to the container port.
- It is the port through which you can access the services running inside the Docker container from the host machine or external systems.
When you use the -p option with Docker to map ports, you are specifying the host port.

**Container Port:** 
- The container port is the port on which a service inside the Docker container is running.
- It is the port to which applications inside the container bind to receive incoming network traffic.
- When you expose a port in a Dockerfile or with the -p option when running a container, you are specifying the container port.

**Example** 
```
docker run -p 6000:80 nginx
```
- 6000 is the host port, meaning you can access the services from the host machine on port 6000.
- 80 is the container port, indicating the service inside the container is listening on port 80.
- In this scenario, if we point our web browser to http://localhost:6000, we are accessing the NGINX web server running inside the Docker Container on its port 80.








## Docker Alpine
Docker Alpine represents the containerized adaptation of Alpine Linux, a Linux distribution celebrated for its exceptional lightweight nature and robust security features. Known for its minimalistic design and security-centric approach, Alpine Linux has become a favored option for containerized applications. Docker Alpine seamlessly blends the strengths of Alpine Linux—its lightweight and secure foundation—with the adaptability and user-friendly features inherent in Docker containers. This integration positions Docker Alpine as an outstanding preference for developers seeking to craft containerized applications that are both efficient and secure, offering ease of deployment and customization.


## Ubuntu Image/Container Commands

**Pull Ubuntu Latest Iamge**
```
docker pull ubuntu latest
```

**Create Ubuntu Container**
```
docker run -itd --name <container_name/id>  ubuntu /bin/bash
```
- NOTE: It will create a Ubuntu Container and will provide an interactive terminal

```
docker exec -it <container_name/id> /bin/bash
```
- NOTE: It will open the intreactive terminal of newly created container.

**Stop Ubuntu Container**
- To exit the interactive terminal of ubuntu container.
```
exit
```
- To close the ubuntu container

```
docker stop <container_name/id>
```

**Restart the Stoped Ubuntu Container**
- To start the ubuntu container
```
docker start <container_id/id>
```
- To enter the interactive terminal of running ubuntu container.
```
docker exec -it <container_id/id> /bin/bash
```
**Remove the Container**
```
docker rm <container_name/id>
```